## Chapter 2: Recipe for Good Media Research

> _A numberwang is a statistic you can bandy around that sounds impressive but, with a bit of context, is less so._
>
> — Steve Weaver, Director of Research, Insights and Education, ThinkTV Australia

To explain how we operate here at Amplified Intelligence, and to help you navigate through the four million insight pieces published near daily in the trade press, I need to take you on a quick trip back to the first century BC. I promise to teleport you there and back with only the most relevant disruption to your thinking. And I might have exaggerated about the four million insight pieces, but rest assured we take our numbers very seriously. So seriously, I think it’s important to pass on what we know about how to differentiate ‘numberwang’ from rigour, the guiding principles of good research to look for and those which we apply.

### The Vitruvian Man

#### Rule-Based Systems

> _I have drawn up definite rules to enable you, by observing them, to have personal knowledge of the quality both of existing buildings and of those which are yet to be constructed._
>
> — Marcus Vitruvius Pollio, Preface, Book I (Morgan’s translation)

Back in the first century BC, Marcus Vitruvius Pollio, a Roman civil engineer and architect (80–70 BC—after c.15 BC) knew exactly what good research looked like. Vitruvius is most well-known for his multi-volume work, _de Architectura libri decem,_ which translates to _Ten Books on Architecture_. He is cited as the original classical authority on rule-based architectural systems and his works inspired the famous drawing by Leonardo da Vinci of the Vitruvian Man (the perfect specimen of a male body relative to the relationship between proportion and stable structure). Vitruvius suggested that the practice of architecture should be based on guiding rules and principles, both ideological and practical. Adhering to rules around Order, Arrangement, Eurythmy, Symmetry, Propriety and Economy, would prevent structures from ‘falling to decay’. If an architect diligently follows these rules, ‘durability will be assured’. It was Vitruvius’ goal to disseminate this knowledge, to transform these codifications from metaphysics to practice. _de Architectura_ was hugely successful and Vitruvius’ advice has been followed for centuries, with his work still included in first year foundation architecture courses at universities around the world.

#### The Vitruvius of Marketing

Introducing the Vitruvius of modern marketing—Andrew Ehrenberg (1926– 2010). His highly awarded work in the 1950s and 1960s set the foundation for marketing rule-based systems today. Andrew Ehrenberg was a professor and a statistician who, for over half a century, contributed to marketing literature around systematic patterns in buyer behaviour. His main contribution was put forward as a collection of works with co-author, Gerald Goodhardt, in _The Dirichlet: A comprehensive Model of Buying Behaviour_ (1984). In essence, the NBD-Dirichlet model of consumer behaviour is a stationary, probabilistic model that has been shown to accurately describe how consumers behave and how brands perform across a very broad range of conditions. We introduced in Chapter 1 that Ehrenberg’s discovery shows that a brand’s customer base can accurately be described by a negative binomial distribution (NBD) of buying rates. Meaning, under most conditions the distribution reflects a high incidence of light buyers (shoppers who have a low to close-to-zero purchasing rate), fewer medium buyers, and very few heavy buyers. Despite the model being a stationary model (which tells us that brand growth is actually unusual and relatively hard to achieve), brands clearly do grow and decline over time. It tells us a great deal about how market share change occurs and what marketers can do to foster these rare movements.

The key point of Ehrenberg’s work is that the path to growth is less of a marketer’s choice, rather a statistical certainty. It turns out that marketing is less magic and a lot more science; not unlike the philosophy of Vitruvius many centuries earlier. The two key generalisations from the model that shape the way we should undertake marketing and inform the methodological considerations behind media research, are Double Jeopardy and the Duplication of Purchase Laws: _The Law of Double Jeopardy_ describes the relationship between the size of a brand and the loyalty of its customer base. The Double Jeopardy pattern reflects the additional benefits of a brand’s size. Not only does a big brand have more customers (penetration), but its customers are slightly more loyal than the customers of smaller competitor brands. Brand growth comes from larger movements in customer numbers and simultaneous, but far smaller, corresponding movements in the loyalty of those customers. So, for marketers that seek to grow, marketing efforts should be focused on attracting non/ lighter brand buyers to the brand. This strategy will increase penetration rates rather than focus on increasing the loyalty of existing heavy-buying customers. _Duplication of Purchase Law_ describes the way in which competing brands share their customers. It shows that the proportion of customers that a brand shares with a competitor is dependent upon the size of that competitor. For example, Coke is the largest brand in the soft drink market and sees less sharing of customers with its competitors. While a much larger proportion of Dr Peppers customers (a small brand in the market) will also buy Coke. This phenomenon shows that customers consistently, and predictably, buy from a small group of brands, and one brand in this group (the largest brand) is favoured over the others. Ehrenberg suggests that once these expectations are set, the implications for marketers become clear. Growth comes from getting more customers, not from attempting to increase loyalty; and customers are shared between brands in a systematic fashion. Regardless of any brand’s unique selling proposition or image, the biggest potential for brand growth comes from getting the customers of the biggest brands in the category to try you at least once.

> **REMEMBER THIS SIMPLE TRUTH**
> Understanding the NBD-Dirichlet Model of Consumer Behaviour is vital to media planning as it allows us to define robust benchmarks for what can be expected from advertising.

#### The Litmus Test is Replication

_If P reveals truth, then replication should reveal the same truth._

Geoff Cumming, Professor of Psychology, La Trobe University Marketing moves at a fast pace. The late Bob Barocci (former President and CEO of the Advertising Research Foundation) once remarked that marketers were putting change ahead of learning. The same can be said for marketing researchers. With accelerated change comes accelerated learning and accelerated learning can carry error. Let’s step back a bit. In the empirical sciences, meaningful results come not from testing increasingly specific hypotheses, but building on existing results. A replication study tries to repeat an earlier study, using similar methods and under similar circumstances, to determine the reproducibility of the earlier study’s results. Replication with extension is where a study is conducted using similar methods but with slightly varying circumstances, such as different countries, sample demographics or product categories. Replication (with extension) increases the likelihood that the results are valid, predictable and will hold over time and under fire. That is what makes them truly valuable. Replication is about looking for results that are reasonably similar, not significantly different. Significantly different results should ring alarm bells as they are often wrong.

> **REMEMBER THIS SIMPLE TRUTH**
> Replication is the key to rigorous research. When a result holds over a range of conditions, the result can then be used predictively.

It’s easy to be caught up in the excitement of a significant finding. New findings are typically reported as being of statistical or managerial significance, and case studies seem to carry far more weight than they should. Increased pace and a monumental rate of change has prompted a willingness to accept the ‘findings’ of unregulated studies that ‘sound reasonable’. Marketers under pressure to build sales growth on an unrelenting frontier, turn to the most influential advice or that which best fits with their plan so far. The result is a large amount of unsubstantiated marketing advice, taken as fact. Andrew Ehrenberg and John Bound (2000) themselves have this advice: ‘We believe that the main stumbling block in developing law like relationships is that statistically minded researchers usually try to find an instant solution to

a practical problem, without first investing in longer term R&D to establish what, if any, generalisable relationships exist in the data. This is like astronomers trying to predict the data of an eclipse without having studied the planets.’

> **REMEMBER THIS SIMPLE TRUTH**
> When a study is claiming a single instance breakthrough, sit and wait for a repeated result before changing course.

An example of ‘research gone wild’ can be found in psychology. A November 2019 article (www.nature.com) outlined a sector in crisis, suggesting that only half of all seminal studies published can be repeated. An international team of some 200 psychologists commissioned to replicate some of the biggest findings in their field found that key findings that have shaped our thinking on human behaviours, may not be real. These include the concepts of social priming, subliminal exposures and facial-feedback hypothesis, all of which have implications for marketing. The research team does call out the irony of their generalised finding that only half of all studies can be replicated, but the irony doesn’t stop there. The opening quote of this section by Professor Geoff Cumming, noted author on statistics reform and Emeritus Professor of Psychology at La Trobe University, suggests that the truth of the P score is in its replication. Cumming challenges the widely accepted belief that P scores of statistical significance demonstrate whether an effect is reliable and endurable. He’s not alone, in 2016 American Statistical Association warned against the misuse of statistical significance and P values due to their potential to lead to false conclusions. Cumming shows that statistical significance can change, and change drastically, even when a random sample is drawn from the same data. The irony here is not from what he says, but that his field is psychology. Reasons for replication failures can include anything from fluke or statistically weak findings, omission of outliers (data fraud), lack of controls and not considering the whole picture (unknown variables that influence study outcomes). Our own work on attention and media impact, from previous work including _Viral Marketing: The Science of Sharing_, highlights how lack of controls and failing to look at the bigger picture, directly and significantly impact the media sector. For any new media, marketers seem to go through a worship stage. We have seen it with Facebook and Google Ads, and more recently with Instagram influencer marketing. In the worship stage, the excitement of

possibilities shines all of the light on attractive positives leaving the reality of ugly truths in the shadows. The time it takes for successfully duplicated results just doesn’t fit with the speed of uptake and the desperate need to be ahead of the pack. Of course, the ultimate result is that one-offs and case studies are claimed as laws. Before you know it, someone has written a bible based on a collection of rules that can’t be replicated, and qualitative examinations of a single instance are being sold as truth. The excitement wanes around about the time sales start to decline and too much budget has been assigned. So, as you consider the four million must-read insight pieces that come across your desk tomorrow (again perhaps a slight numberwang), consider whether their insights would last as long as Vitruvius or Ehrenberg’s advice. It‘s the reason the generalisable NBD-Dirichlet model of consumer behaviour sits behind our research informing the questions we investigate, the methodological considerations (including experimental controls) we choose, and what we recommend. However, just to make the Ehrenberg disciples twitch I would like to throw a contentious cat among the pigeons. Even Vitruvius would see variations to the foundational concept of stability when more modern materials became available in later centuries. So, in challenging boundary conditions the NBD-Dirichlet should be tested to understand the effect (if any) that the era of surveillance capitalism might have on the distributions and/or patterns. This is not to suggest it would (or it wouldn’t) but changes in our industry, our human ability to process, our accessibility and the nature of supercomputers, have never in history been so fast and significant. It is vital we continue this study of consumer behaviour to understand the long-term effect on such foundational work. After all, the litmus test is replication and life would be boring without the ability to challenge.

> **REMEMBER THIS SIMPLE TRUTH**
> When things are vastly different than expected, be cautious, it usually means it’s not right. Look for work that fails to decay.

### The Good and the Ugly of Advertising Measurement

Combining shortening budget cycles and an abundance of bad research with the effortlessness of publishing on the www, creates a perfect storm for advertisers. In fairness, the academic process does move at a glacial pace,

so waiting for double blind reviewed journal articles is no more helpful. Sneaking in through the murky light of this perfect storm is our old friend bias. Sometimes bias is created through non-independence and sometimes through methodological design. Non-independence or influence from interested parties is easier to notice, although sophisticated marketing can conceal financial and ideological bias. Bias through methodological design is a more insidious problem. Not all non-independent research is bad, but all poorly designed research is. Here are a few simple things to look out for in research design before you accept and apply new findings. After all, applying findings from poorly designed research can impact your media buying, badly.

#### Naturalness and Experimental Controls

Of all marketing activities, advertising impact is particularly difficult to research. One of the complications is ‘naturalness’. True ‘in-the-wild’ advertising exposure, where a viewer is exposed to advertising in a completely natural setting, is gold standard. But it brings with it complications. Natural advertising exposure means some people in the audience might see an ad once at 9 p.m. on a weeknight, while others see the ad five times across different times of the day and week. Some might be exposed to a highly emotive ad that has high attention pulling power, while others are exposed to less than stellar creative. Some might be exposed at a higher rate of viewability, while others are exposed to ads that are barely on screen (see Chapter 6); some might see the same ad many times, while others just once. An almost endless array of exposure options can occur, and the differing variables are all potentially influential in generating advertising impact, either on their own or combined. So how do you know if it was the advertising that had an impact and not the environment in which the viewing took place? The answer is, experimental controls. The ability to control for, or isolate, one variable while the effect of the other is considered. And this control is vital, it can literally mean the difference between comparing apples with apples, and apples with pears. And when apples and pears are compared, the results can end badly (see Meanwhile in the Real World: Numberwang down under).

> **REMEMBER THIS SIMPLE TRUTH**
> Good research applies experimental controls that isolate real effect.

While controlled conditions are ideal in that they are better for measurement precision, the problem is that simply knowing you are in an experiment for advertising can fundamentally change your behaviour. Even with the most honourable intentions, people behave differently when it is obvious they are being watched or tested, generating ‘reactive error’ (i.e. responding to the experimental environment itself ). The challenge has always been to apply experimental controls without trading off against a ‘natural’ viewing experience. While content can be controlled and subsequent frequency or creative effects can be minimised in the laboratory, the un-naturalness of this environment brings with it its own bias. You might be on a couch in a laboratory, but it’s not your couch or your family and not your typical interruptions (the kids, the cat, the doorbell). Sometimes just knowing you’re being watched from behind the one-way glass can bias a result. Laboratory-based experiments also tend to have low generalisability because they rely on whatever sample of subjects the researcher can persuade to visit the lab. Often the cost of running experiments is high, financially limiting the sample in terms of numbers. This is particularly the case with much of the attention work using biometrics, such as electrocardiogram (heart rate) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (brain activity). Laboratory-based work tends to limit scaled replication. If you are really lucky, you might be asked to wear some sci-fi fashionable gaze-tracking goggles. They are cheaper, making it easier to recruit larger samples. Granted, at least some of the newer versions of this hardware no longer have cables, so you can view programming at home without being connected to the mothership. But even though they more closely resemble heavy framed glasses, wearing goggles on your head is probably not typical of your standard at-home TV or internet session. This all becomes crucial if the research is designed to reveal a winner and a loser, such as cross-platform effectiveness. As an example of this type of bias in market today, an (unnamed) media platform funded a study where viewers were asked to wear gaze-tracking goggles while viewing for 45 minutes on their platform, yet the viewing time for the (unnamed) competitor was 90 minutes. This raises two issues. Firstly, uncomfortable hardware will be more uncomfortable when tasked with wearing it for twice as long. So it is highly likely the participant was less distracted and uncomfortable (and paying more attention, which is the point of the study) at the 45-minute mark than the 90-minute mark. Secondly, to make matters worse this study considered the proportion of time in high/low levels of attention across the absolute period of time. So, (with

the numbers changed slightly to maintain platform anonymity) 60% of 45 minutes (27 mins) is actually less in absolute time than 40% of 90 minutes (36 mins), but the story was sold that 60% attention is better than 40%. If that’s not enough, after the study viewers were asked whether they agree or disagree that the number of ads during the session was annoying. The panel showed in favour of the funding platform—the one that showed the panel half the number of ads! While this experiment was in-home and somewhat natural (other than the goggles), the rest of the study showed bias in many areas which is (very) likely to have skewed the results. The method applied must be consistent across all platforms. Too often we see ‘winning’ findings in trade-based insight pieces, only to discover that the methodologies used are vastly different across platforms. This makes them incomparable, or worse, clearly favouring one platform over another. SUMMARY OF GOOD\*\*—\*\*Consistent methodology when comparing across platform. Natural viewing environment. Experimental controls for mediating variables. Scaled for generalisability. SUMMARY OF UGLY—Allowing bias to alter the ‘good’ research fundamentals, introducing inconsistency, and allowing a funding partner to claim the win on the back of it.

> **REMEMBER THIS SIMPLE TRUTH**
> Look out for the uglies in research design, particularly in cross-platform effectiveness when the research is designed to demonstrate a winner and loser platform.

#### Market Share is the Forgotten Child

The complications of naturalness can extend into theoretical considerations. We know, for example, that advertising is noticed more by people who already buy (or more heavily buy) the advertised brand than by people who are light or non-buyers. Similarly, as previously noted, big brands have more buyers who buy slightly more often. So, without accounting for this in the analysis, any observed heightened attention or chance of buying could just simply reflect the brand’s market share or a skew in the sample frame (towards heavier buyers), rather than the effectiveness of advertising. The simple thing that can fix this is a baseline. Market share offers a baseline, but it is the forgotten child in research design. Using NBD-Dirichlet, a brand’s size has more of an impact on how a consumer responds to advertising than the advertising itself. The need to incorporate the brand’s size as

a baseline becomes paramount to understanding the true value of any differences measured. Let’s consider social metrics for a moment. Brands often default to soft engagement measures such as Likes, comments and shares as a measure of brand success. But the reality is big brands simply have more buyers who engage, which drives social metrics up, rather than the content necessarily being any more engaging. And the inverse is true. Lower Mental Availability (which is a symptom of being small) means that the ads of small brands are less likely to be recalled. This doesn’t mean that all ad campaigns of small brands are ineffective, it simply means brand size hijacks the outcome when considered at an aggregate level. The same can be said here for brand lift studies and offline word-of-mouth. Brand lift studies experience other issues lurking below the surface, while offline word-of-mouth has been found to be more a function of audience size (in consideration of TV programs) than an over-abundance of program loyalty. When studies fail to account for market share they run the risk of misattribution of effects. Without context, the findings might be inflating the importance of any differences. A big issue for our industry is that many commercial offerings, those that sell market research, could be completely misleading their client (hopefully unintentionally). SUMMARY OF GOOD—Applying market share baselines when considering differences from one brand to another in any research capacity (i.e. pre-testing, recall, brand lift, sales, online engagement, mental availability, etc.). SUMMARY OF UGLY—Market research companies that don’t understand the nature of buyer behaviour and sell research that doesn’t include brand usage baselines.

> **REMEMBER THIS SIMPLE TRUTH**
> Accounting for market share is an important factor when considering differences in advertising/media research. It can mean the difference between any result and the right result.

#### Beware the Legacy Proxy

Sales is the holy grail of business. If you don’t sell stuff, you don’t survive. Simple. And the importance of understanding the influence of advertising on sales is a no-brainer. The trouble is, distinguishing the influence of advertising on aggregated sales is often very difficult, near impossible. Marketers tend to revert to legacy measures, tested at the individual level, that have

at some point assumed to resemble sales impact. In an attempt to solve issues surrounding proxies, academic researchers in the 1990s arrived at single-source data as the gold standard for measuring advertising effects. Singlesource data involves collecting both natural advertising exposure and later buying behaviour from the same individual buyers over an extended period (typically up to a month after the exposure). Analysis of the data at a fundamental level involves comparing the buying behaviours of individuals who were exposed to advertising, with those who were not. This methodological approach eliminates many of the problems previously noted. But (and it’s a big BUT) it is very expensive. A few global brand owners can afford it, and only a very small proportion of publicly available studies use this type of gold-standard data. This is why proxies are used so abundantly in market. Single-source data is out of reach for most. Legacy measures are easy to collect and, well um, handed down by predecessors. That’s the legacy part. A desire for consistency in measurement over time, coupled with low-cost collection, makes it hard for managers to change. Purchase intention and brand recall are the most commonly used. But advertisers are not the only ones who default to easy-to-collect proxies. We see big media use them too. Problem is, legacy measures don’t typically reveal the truth. _Intention_ scales usually involve the self-reported probability of a buying event occurring. The difficulty with intention is that it’s based on the ill-informed concept that advertising is highly persuasive and can force a sale. Underpinned by the ingrained AIDA Hierarchy of Effects model developed in 1898, this models suggests that advertising has to first make one aware (in a fully cognisant way), then interest comes, then product desire, followed by the sweet smell of action. In this scenario, intention is the proxy for action. It relies on the assumption that cognition affects behaviour. To compound the confusion, other versions of AIDA switch out awareness for attention. It then becomes: advertising must first secure attention, then hold it (interest), followed by the consumer passing through the hierarchical stages to action. The premise being, ‘…without attention, you can hardly persuade them of anything’. Yes, this is a quote from a large US management company called Changing Minds, dedicated to exactly that. A critical flaw surfaces here—_awareness_ and _attention_ are not interchangeable! Awareness is about cognitive realisation, conscious understanding and grasp, but attention can also have an impact at lower levels of cognitive awareness. A viewer does not need to be fully aware and paying high, controlled, sustained attention for the ad to have an impact (see Chapter 5). In this regard, attention and awareness are very different constructs. That these

terms are so flippantly switched, demonstrates a lack of theoretical understanding in regard to attention, AIDA and its action proxy. There is plenty of evidence in the literature to show that intention significantly overstates behaviours, to the point where it may not be any better than mere chance. It is consistently reported that around only 50% of consumers who voiced an intent to buy actually follow up on it. Additionally, there is no consensus around whether the non-intenders or the intenders are more accurate in their response. What is definitive though is that intention is correlated with previous buying. This means that an intender is much more likely to have previously bought the brand than a non-intender. Again, this goes back to the importance of baselines. Without understanding the baseline usage behaviour of the panel, the intention score recorded during in-market testing could simply reflect previous buying rather than the advertising having any great effect. _Recall_ is a measure of explicit memory where the consumer has to consciously think back to advertising exposure moments to retrieve from memory and report via recall and recognition tasks. Recall as a measure has been around since the 1950s. The original rationality for using it was the belief that recall is a necessary condition for a change in behaviour or attitude. Suggesting that the purpose of an ad is to persuade someone to buy, and that high levels of recall of the brand message means sales will surely follow. There is little to no evidence that a sale will follow, and given advertising is not persuasive, there is actually more evidence that it won’t. The point here comes back to accounting for previous buying behaviour. There is a well-established generalisation that users of a brand have a much higher propensity to recall (and pay attention to) advertising than non-users. In fact, users are around twice as likely to recall as non-users. When you couple this with not accounting for brand size, the recall study you just read (and made decisions upon) just got skewed. For example, big brands will have more existing users than small brands (fact of Double Jeopardy) that also recall more. So, without any baselines (both market share and controlling for users/non-users in the sample frame), the bigger brand will always report higher recall than the smaller brand. Rarely do proponents of recall apply such baselines. Back in the real world, this becomes problematic for marketers when an insights team releases a study that shows that recall on Platform A is much higher than recall on Platform B. If the creative wasn’t held constant, where the _same_ ads were exposed over both platforms to the control and test groups, the inflated recall measure might simply be because the ads seen on

Platform A were generally bigger brands than those seen on the Platform B (and/or because the sample frame was skewed to heavier buyers). Let’s assume for a moment that the researcher or insights team has applied the appropriate baselines and/or controls. There is plenty of evidence to suggest that recall actually can be a useful metric for measuring explicit memory, BUT do not be fooled into thinking that it is a suitable proxy measure for all attention. It is not. And this is a really important point. Okay, I hope you’re still with me. Recall has been widely noted as a suitable proxy for high concentrated attention conditions, where the viewer is watching intently in a state of full consciousness. It is under these conditions that recall has the capability of measuring explicit memory of past experiences. It is also widely noted that such measures are valid only under these conditions and not in brand choice/retrieval situations where attention is divided. This means that recall is not suitable for measuring implicit memory where viewer attention is less concentrated and under the threshold of full consciousness. Chapter 5 is dedicated to deepening our understanding of the many levels of attention and the relative states of consciousness, but for now here is the kicker. In the age of distraction, the larger majority of attention paid to advertising is at lower levels of processing than you think. But while high-attention processing is rare, low-attention processing does have an impact and that incidental ad exposure can actually influence consumer decisions and support the formation of consideration sets. It’s why I’m hammering this point home. Recall is being used as a proxy for measuring attention because it is easy and inexpensive. However, as a stand-alone measure it is not only reporting a small part of the story, it is wrongly changing the narrative (which is far worse). As an industry if we have any chance of driving the attention economy in the right direction we need to find a ‘true north’ measure. SUMMARY OF GOOD—When recall is baselined properly it can identify high-attention processing. SUMMARY OF UGLY—Intention is no better than chance, recall is ineffective for indirect or subconscious exposure given cognitive effort is required to be able to recall and retrieve memory.

> **REMEMBER THIS SIMPLE TRUTH**
> Be cautious of insight pieces that use measures of intention and recall. These proxies demonstrate a weak correlation to in-market sales performance.

#### Not All Machines are Like R2-D2

R2-D2, who is now inducted into the Robot Hall of Fame (yes, there is one), is unwavering in loyalty and indisputably reliable. His one job is to use ingenuity and intellect to save the galaxy and his humans—Luke, Leia and Han. Turns out that not all machines are like R2-D2. Just because something is tech, doesn’t mean it should be trusted without question. Just ask Bob Hoffman, he has some pretty strong views on that. Some research technology on the surface appears to deliver magic, but underneath fails to address the complications and biases I’ve mentioned. In essence, it could be amazing technology, but poor construct. Or good construct, but poorly measured. Either of these combinations is bad. Take Paul Ekman’s emotions coding, for example, emotions as a construct is good to measure. Researchers have shown that the emotion triggered by an advertisement is important for its effectiveness. But questions have been raised over the use of commercially available emotion software development kits that use Ekman’s six emotions as their measure. Ekman conducted seminal research in the 1950s on the biological correlations of specific emotions to universal facial expressions. He found that a basic set of six facial expressions was linked to the same six emotions across five countries. He built an atlas of facial expressions (perfect for training data some 60 years later). These universal emotions are now commonly used in facial technology that considers advertising impact. They are: happiness, anger, sadness, disgust, surprise and fear. Of the many criticisms that have surfaced, one points out that Ekman’s work really only found that there are some universal expressions across countries, not that these are the only emotions expressed. There are literally hundreds of papers that show a justified extension of Ekman’s framework, adding in more emotions. For the work behind _Viral marketing: The Science of Sharing,_ we wrote our own emotions framework. It incorporated Ekman, but we did it because we believe that the Ekman 6 as a stand-alone framework is unbalanced. We used high and low arousal emotional pairs, evenly balanced by positive and negative valence. The point of my story is that it now looks as though emotions are not universal, after all. Yet, largely due to the training data available, the Ekman 6 emotions are still at the core of our advertising testing systems. While not all robots are like R2-D2, they’re not all out to kill us either. We can’t let fear trap us in the dark ages. A high-profile academic institution recently published this on technology, ‘Today’s world of never-ending technological breakthroughs creates the illusion that jumping from

bandwagon to bandwagon is moving forward, when we are really going around in circles.’ That’s like telling Thomas Edison to get off the electric light bandwagon after thousands of unsuccessful attempts. Just as well he was prepared to test and fail, otherwise I’d be writing this in the dark. As much as any proud disruptor would like to think that they were solely responsible, it doesn’t work like that. Most great breakthroughs don’t come from an individual, they happen through the culmination of efforts by many people on the discovery trail. When you’re looking for research technology you can trust, don’t just check the person who put their name to it. Check for the crowd of people on whose shoulders their discovery stands. If you can find a solid, theoretically robust foundation, you’re on the right track.

> **REMEMBER THIS SIMPLE TRUTH**
> Look for research technology that is based on solid foundations. It should be theoretically robust, transparent and evidence-based.

### A Story About a New Approach to an Old Problem

A great deal of the material you will read in the coming chapters comes directly from our own extensive research on media effectiveness, viewability, attention and much more. Given I have just asked you to challenge the research you read, here is an open description of our methodology. Let’s start by saying the egg came first, not the chicken. What this means is that our own research framework (supported by bespoke technology) was built from the ground up to support the research questions we needed to answer. We did this to ensure that before we started measuring effectiveness (and attention), our measure was empirically led and would provide the right result, not just any result. As such, our system applies everything we know about the generalised laws of brand growth and consumer behaviour, yet incorporates technology and application that challenges the boundaries of research design. It is robust yet agile—an important distinction. _It all started with a question_ Several years ago we were asked a research question. And then another. And another. The questions were about the impact that different media attributes have on consumer behaviour, specifically sales outcomes. The attributes have included: ad pixels, view time, device type, platform type, clutter, ad placement, sound and marketing context including dual

```
×	×
```

The ability to measure attention (at scale) changed everything. It allowed us to be more diagnostic at a second-by-second level so we could better understand ‘why’ rather than just ‘what’. More excitingly, it meant that we could help pivot the entire research conversation around the appropriateness of attention as a proxy for sales and play a role in the trading future of our industry (see Chapter 5). _We had to build something bespoke_ To answer these research questions, we would need individual level single-source data, with a twist. We needed a way to deliver a view, in a 100% natural environment, yet maintain experimental controls on test ads, across multiple platforms, across countries, across devices, while collecting attention, sales and viewability metrics. Simple right? Fast forward to 2019 and this is how we collect research data and process it:

- Customised app to collect the data

A key component of our research framework is a customised collection app that each research participant downloads onto their device. The app ensures the following process takes place (in chronological order):

- It exposes the right viewer to the right viewing session (i.e. directs them to Facebook, YouTube, Twitter, TV channels or others). If it’s Facebook, the respondent logs in using their own log-in details (which we don’t scrape in case you’re wondering), so that the Facebook experience appears completely natural. The viewing session time is aligned with the typical experience on the platform (but importantly we consider impact by average second, to remove any biases as previously mentioned).
  - As soon as the respondent is experiencing the platform, the app activates the user-facing camera/webcam when an ad is displayed on their screen. This collects facial footage at five frames per second, which is

then converted to binary data using one of our attention models. The model is altered for each device type used, so that screen information can be incorporated into the determination of where the face is looking on screen.

- Where the research requires the viewer to be subject to test advertising material, on digital platforms the app is designed to intercept the natural ad load in real time and replace the ads they would have seen with a test ad. So instead of seeing an ad they were naturally meant to receive (i.e. via targeting), they will see our purpose-chosen test ads. Intercepting the advertising in this way ensures the ad viewing that does occur, closely matches the normal user experience, in that they would have naturally been served an ad in that position. This allows us to keep the creative constant across platforms and is crucial in order to accurately differentiate between platform performance differences and creative differences in advertising effectiveness, while also controlling for targeting nuances between platforms. In terms of the technology’s capabilities, we can intercept ad loads for both video and static ads and can do so for any type of placement (i.e. mid-roll, pre-roll, in-feed). For linear TV, test advertising is edited into the content prior to the exposure occurring (more detail on linear TV below).
  - The app tags all ads the participant is exposed to, whether intercepted or in the wild. This is how we track the pixels of ads that are on screen, their duration on screen, the proportion of the screen that the ad covers as the viewer scrolls (we call this coverage), and whether the sound is on or off and how high the volume is.
- After the viewing experience, the collection app redirects the participant to the virtual store that houses the choice tasks for each of the test brand categories. The respondent is asked to make a choice in each of the test brand categories from the test brand and several competitor brands (shown in random order). This is a validated approach for actual choice behaviour; experiments applying this method have long been undertaken in health, transport, economics and marketing. We use the method to reveal potential differences between exposure groups in overall behavioural preference for advertised brands.
- Short Term Advertising Strength (STAS) is calculated after gathering choice from a viewer session. STAS is calculated by determining the proportion of category buyers who bought a specific brand having NOT been exposed to brand advertising (control group), and comparing it to the proportion of category buyers who WERE exposed to the same brand advertising (test group). By collecting buying data from a non-exposed

control group of participants we can differentiate between real advertising effects and the impact of brand size on buying propensity. This is a key differentiator to the many sales or brand lift studies in the market today. A STAS score of 100 indicates no advertising impact in that those who were exposed to the advertising were just as likely to purchase as those who were not. A score above 100 indicates that the advertising had a real incremental impact on sales.

- Following questions of product choice, additional relevant information about the respondents is also gathered. That is, whether they are typical, heavy, or light users of the brands chosen and the test brand. All of these measures are used to triangulate with attention and product choice for greater validity. We also collect (via questioning, with permission) basic demographic information at this point.
  - Once the respondent has finished their session, the app becomes redundant on their device (please refer to our data privacy policy on amplifiedintelligence.com.au).
- Television collection varies slightly from online platforms. A second phone is set up in the home (using hardware we send them) which streams content to their TV and provides a user-facing camera. Participants can freely get up and leave as they normally would in a natural TV experience. This technology includes Adaptive Bitrate Streaming (like Netflix) to ensure people with average wi-fi can fulfil completion.
- Machine Learning Model and Data Analytics Framework to process the data

The data we collect is then sent through our Data Analytics Framework, which incorporates custom machine learning models to transpose the recorded webcam footage to a second-by-second measure of attention. Early literature on attention to media (mostly in TV) talked about three types of attention—active watching, passive viewing and avoidance. This early literature (in the 2000s) sought to ethnographically understand where people were physically looking when TV advertising aired. The need for such consideration was grounded in the thoroughly sensible assumption that Peoplemeter panellists were probably not perfectly recording exactly how attentive they were being during their TV watching (i.e. measurement error associated with accurate pushing of the button was probably pervasive). Jump over to the psychology literature on attention and dual processing

and similar levels of attention emerged based on three grades of consciousness processing (High, Semi, Sub) (see Chapter 5 for Attention Conceptual Framework). Our output attention score is an average per second, based on the extent to which eyes were on screen and on the advertisement (connected to a pixel reference point via an ad tag). Average second is the most relevant comparison where advertising varies in length. In particular, we consider:

- **Active Attention**: Was the respondent looking directly at the ad?- **Passive Attention**: Was the respondent in eye shot, but not directly looking at the ad?- **Non-Attention**: Had the respondent walked away from the TV, or completely looked away from the mobile screen during the ad-frame?

Our models are also trained for device orientation, remembering, of course, that people flip their phones around depending on what they’re viewing. Much of the gaze literature talks about the main factors that any technique should possess to guarantee good measurement as being: (a) accuracy, (b) reliability, (c) robustness, (d) non-intrusiveness, (e) free head movements, and (f ) real-time response. These are the factors we strive for. Finally, all data, including all viewability metrics, and other attributes such as sound and brand choice, is then matched at the individual view level. Voilà questions answered. Well not quite, this is where the humans step in for comprehensive interpretation of the results. No computer can do that, yet.

### The Wrap up

Marketers of today have it tougher than ever before, there are too many ways things can go terribly wrong. Is our system perfect? No. Do we continually strive for improvements? Yes. We do know that our system has been disruptive for its time and that we have managed to answer research questions robustly where many have failed. And we are proud that we brought a little bit of R2-D2 back to the future by way of ingenuity and empiricallyled intellect. Remember, always scratch below the surface when investing in systems and research that can have a fundamental impact on your business. And always ask the question, which came first the chicken or the egg?

> **MEANWHILE IN THE REAL WORLD**
> **Numberwang down under**

There’s no doubt that numbers are slippery. Intentional and accidental numerwangs are the reason our industry is teetering on a sinking raft of bad measures. In August 2019 in Australia, Facebook felt the full wrath of a numberwang. In conjunction with global professional services company Pricewaterhouse- Coopers (PwC), they produced a report about media consumption in Australia. Called _My Screens: Video Consumption in Australia_, it made some bold claims about ‘unique audience’. The fun started when Facebook announced on Australian trade press site AdNews that it’s, ‘Time to rethink consumption assumptions’. In this instance Facebook was right, it is time to rethink consumption assumptions, BUT we need to be crystal clear on what lies beneath our measures. Within 48 hours another big player, Nielsen, had challenged their numbers and the report vanished like a bursting bubble. At the heart of the numberwang were exceedingly high Facebook audience numbers. Always the first clue: when something is very different from what you would expect then it’s time to re-check numbers and method. In this case, according to Nielsen, online text consumption data was incorrectly used in place of video consumption data. But the result fitted beautifully with what Facebook was hoping for, showing them to be the top performing media platform in Australia. The numberwang: According to the published study, Facebook dominates the Australian media landscape, reaching 17.3 million ‘unique audience’ members per month. On top of this, PwC calculated (using a supporting Nielsen dataset) that users spend 882 minutes with video per month on the platform. The reality (also from Nielsen data): Facebook’s true monthly video audience is 4.5 million, and that doesn’t include mobile, the device primarily used to access the platform. This makes the engagement time with video on Facebook 79.5 minutes per month. For this numberwang, the data were correct, but they belonged to another discussion.

