## Chapter 3: How Advertising Works (so far)

> _Trying to understand the media without understanding advertising and marketing, its fuel supply, is like trying to understand the auto industry without regard to fuel costs._
>
> — Ken Auletta, Author, Frenemies

### The Bert and Ernie of Marketing

At its simplest, there are two primary aspects to making decisions around marketing communication: the message (what to say and how to say it) and the distribution (where to say it and to whom). These two don’t operate in a vacuum, like peanut butter and jelly, Bert and Ernie, macaroni and cheese, they are inextricably linked. How a marketer thinks advertising works directly shapes what is created, which media is chosen, who is targeted and what is measured. It’s almost a trick of the light that marketers think advertising is responsible for so much. Advertising is generally treated with disdain by the wider population, but many industry professionals are in love with the idea that we are in love with advertising and the brands that produce it. Thankfully, research over the years has eroded some previously held notions about how advertising works and marketers are slowly moving away from the belief that advertising is highly persuasive and immediate. This outdated understanding

is replaced with the knowledge that the impacts of advertising are commonly more subtle, take time to play out, and in turn, are difficult to measure. But we can’t relax just yet. For every journal paper that proves (again) that advertising doesn’t shift mountains, there are ten text books being distributed to the next generation of marketers, paying homage to the AIDA customer decision process as the holy grail. The reality is, that advertising has always worked in the same way regardless of our level of understanding. It’s just our interpretation of the reasons for success that has developed over time. So it’s best to put our cards on the table now and briefly outline the guiding principles we align to on how advertising works. This chapter is not meant to be a long and exhaustive source of curated references on all things brand growth, there are other books on the market for that. It offers a layman’s overview of the guiding philosophy that informs everything we do from how we collect data, to the technology we develop, to the narrative we deliver.

### The Guiding Philosophy

#### Advertising Doesn’t Persuade

_The assumption that advertising equals persuasion is so ingrained in the USA that to challenge it elicits much the same reaction as questioning your partner’s parentage._

Tim Ambler, London Business School Imagine for a moment that advertising is the Arc de Triomphe. Unless of course you are French and find even this brief visualisation too unpalatable. While it’s generally accepted that advertising must eventually drive sales, the debate around how advertising works lies in all the theoretically possible roads for getting there. Initially, the vast majority of practitioners believed that advertising worked by persuading audiences to believe in the brand and this would be enough to prompt them to buy. It was assumed that successful advertising campaigns would need to produce an observable and large change in buyer behaviour. When few examples of wholesale behaviour change achieving a massive uplift in sales could actually be produced, the theory was disproven. The dominant theory back in the 1960s was that advertising was capable of persuading a non-buyer to change their behaviour to become a buyer. The final destination, rather than the path to getting there, was all that mattered. We now know that the impacts of advertising are not an immediately felt

behavioural change, rather a subtler nudging of buying propensities across the market. Very successful advertising in the large part reinforces, rather than changes, behaviour. And this occurs over a long timeframe. Sure, there will always be a few oddballs in the audience who see an ad and just have to have that product then and there. But these outliers are never going to be a source for notable changes in aggregate sales levels. The more substantive impact of advertising is a small shift across the whole audience felt over time as buyers come into the buying window. And because each buyer comes into the buying window in their own time (rather than a substantial amount of people at once), an immediate effect will not be evident.

#### Advertising Impact is Small but Positive

In addition to the foundation work described by the generalisations from the NBD-Dirichlet, research around advertising and pricing elasticities provides an indication of the direction and scale of the returns expected. An elasticity is a ratio metric. For example, an advertising elasticity is the proportional uplift in sales impact results for every 1% shift in advertising spend. Pricing elasticities are always negative (i.e. a price drop generates a sales increase) and relatively large (a large sales increase for a small price reduction). Advertising elasticities are positive and comparatively small; that is, a large increase in advertising spend is required to generate even a small increase in immediate sales. This means that brand growth (and decline) is a rarity and that advertising does not necessarily need to drive a large uplift in market share to be deemed successful. Advertising works to announce to potential buyers that the brand exists and then regularly reminds them of its existence so that when they are ready to buy from that category, the brand might come to mind. It moves advertising far away from the famous AIDA concept to one of awareness-trial-repeat (ATR), where awareness is more publicity based (general noticing) than seeking to change how people think and feel about the brand on the spot. This means that trial is less about a ‘successful sales conversion’ and more about an opportunity to be tested for future suitability. In communication, it’s the difference between aggressive and assertive. In advertising, we must accept that publicity, not persuasion, is how advertising works and that advertising makes its main contribution by building memory structures so that when a buyer is in market the brand might come to mind. We must also accept that _mere_ market share maintenance, versus going backwards, is actually a considerable achievement.

> **REMEMBER THIS SIMPLE TRUTH**
> Advertising does work, it just doesn’t cause the great seismic shift in mass buyer behaviour that marketers might think (or hope).

### How Publicity Can Be Measured

#### What is Mental Availability?

If advertising doesn’t shift mountains, and it can’t be seen in aggregated sales, how can it be measured? There are two ways advertisers can directly understand the impact of advertising. One is single-source data which involves collecting both viewing behaviour and buying behaviour from the same individual over an extended period of time. But as noted in Chapter 2, it is expensive which limits its use to the global brands that can afford it. The other way is by tracking a brand’s Mental Availability. This is not looking at sales, rather it considers whether advertising has had some impact on consumer memory (even if a sale is not evident). Professor Jenni Romaniuk, the leading academic in this space, classifies _Mental Availability_ as the strength (uniqueness) and prevalence (number of people) of the brand name and linked associations in a consumer’s memory. Linked associations, if the advertiser has done their job correctly, act as cues that bring their brand to the surface of memory on different occasions, such as Coke and summer, De Beers diamonds and engagement, and here in Australia, Vegemite and breakfast. The more unique these associations are to your brand, the more likely the consumer will think of your brand over your competitor at the buying occasion. Mental Availability has nothing to do with building brand love, intention to buy or any other proxy loyalty type measure. It is the simple notion of strengthening memory cues so that when you propose to your sweetheart on an Australian beach in summer as the sun rises, you think of stocking your picnic basket with cans of Coke, Vegemite and toast, and a thumping great De Beers diamond.

#### Why does it Matter?

Being considered at the time of product purchase, versus not at all, has obvious implications on sales. A brand with strong Mental Availability is more likely to grow, at least not decline.

Of course, a caveat to the above is that the brand is physically available to buy. If a brand is out of stock or hard to access, a customer will choose your nearest competitor with little thought (because we are loyal to switching not loyal to one). Just one reason that marketing and operations need to talk to each other. There’s no joy in doing all of that advertising work only to have your nearest competitor scoop the sale. In terms of measuring, Mental Availability is commonly both misunderstood and misrepresented. It is often passed off in brand research as brand awareness, consideration, brand personality or likelihood/intent of buying. But these are poor proxies and don’t capture the underlying construct of Mental Availability nor do they account for market share baselines (as discussed in Chapter 2). Advertisers who use these measures run the risk of wasting money on trackers that tell them little.

> **REMEMBER THIS SIMPLE TRUTH**
> Mental Availability is considered a market-based asset. Maintaining and building it should be considered a key objective of advertising.

### Staying True to You

#### Becoming Unhinged with Differentiation

We’re all special in our mother’s eyes, but sadly that’s where it ends. When it comes to the specific creative elements that help link buying cues to a brand, being special isn’t worth it. Seeking differentiation via a unique selling proposition (USP) simply results in keeping your brand small because it completely unhinges any attempt to build strong Mental Availability. Let’s take a step back. Traditional product differentiation strategies (Rosser Reeves c.1940s) are based on the notion that product advertising should offer a unique benefit over its competitors to survive. Proponents of persuasion argue this is a necessary component of successful advertising because a strong differentiated proposition convinces the masses to buy one brand over the other. A classic example of this is FedEx, ‘When it absolutely, positively has to be there overnight’ (1978–1983). FedEx was the first company to specialise in overnight air freight and first to implement package tracking. These were processes and service delivery that were undoubtedly the best of their time,

so it’s not surprising FedEx used them as the basis of their core slogan. The slogan was only prevalent for five years but ask any 40+ year old and I’d bet they could still associate it with FedEx. Research has shown there are two underlying issues with attempting to differentiate. First is that the proposition has to be something the competition categorically cannot, does not, or can never offer. It must be real, totally unique and timeless. That is a hard call, most real product differences can be replicated. There are now many more companies than FedEx that express deliver goods overnight. As soon as the proposition is replicated, it breaks/ blurs any memory links the original brand paid a lot of money to establish. Very few USPs are unique to one brand. This leads us to the second issue: research consistently shows that consumers don’t consider brands to be very different. Like we said, no-one is really that special. When we think back to our earlier discussion on NBD- Dirichlet norms, this is why consumers are polygamously loyal to a select few brands in the category. Even the most successful brand can be easily substituted with a competitor. The simple (and brutal) truth is that even a brand’s heaviest users don’t see them as that different from other brands available to them. Seeking to be different, even if it were possible to achieve, will deliver brand decline before it delivers any success. Looping back into FedEx, their current campaign has nothing to do with the speed of service delivery or ability to track packages. Again, not surprising as even non-logistics companies like Amazon can compete in this space. Their overarching mission statement is ‘Solutions powered by people’, but this is not at the forefront of their advertising campaigns. Their individual campaign themes vary from year to year. In 2018, the campaign was called ‘What we deliver by delivering’. Its proposition is that FedEx, above all their competitors, can deliver such things as comfort, memories, opportunity and joy. The series of really lovely heartwarming ads, including a child who leaves her beloved toy at a motel, or a young man who receives a photograph album with treasured memories, did not offer a proposition of ‘real’ difference. Although pity the creative director that needed to follow in the footsteps of ‘When it absolutely, positively has to be there overnight’. The point being, the campaign didn’t need to show a point of difference to be successful.

> **REMEMBER THIS SIMPLE TRUTH**
> Seeking to be differentiated via a unique selling proposition (USP) will keep your brand small, and completely unhinge any attempt to build strong Mental Availability.

#### What is a Distinctive Asset?

So how can a brand build Mental Availability if selling propositions are ineffective? The answer is far simpler than most creative directors would admit. Making the brand distinctive is known to build memory structures and drive Mental Availability. Distinctive brand assets are things that strongly tie the brand in the memory of most consumers. These can be creative elements: logos (Swoosh), colours (Cadbury Purple), fonts (Coke typeface), shapes (VW Beetle), slogans (Finger lickin’ good), characters (Rich Uncle Pennybags) or they can be auditory elements, such as a jingle (Stuck on Band-Aid). As soon as you say ‘Finger lickin’ good’ you know who this is for and your brain likely switches to their equally famous character with a white beard and moustache. The greater number of Distinctive Assets your brand has, the stronger and wider the footprint in memory. Be warned, using them in the background or as an afterthought in advertising does not make them an asset. To be considered a Distinctive Asset, an element needs to evoke the brand (and only that brand) without prompting, for close to 100% of consumers, close to 100% of the time. This is not a five-minute job, nor for the faint-hearted. It takes time, unwavering commitment and money. The Distinctive Assets we have mentioned have been established over many decades, longer than the tenure of most CMOs. Harland David Sanders has been dead for close to 40 years, but his brand legacy will never be forgotten. And this is exactly what he intended.

> **REMEMBER THIS SIMPLE TRUTH**
> Distinctive Assets are the glue between your brand and your customer’s memory. Build and protect them at all costs.

### The Wrap up

In finishing this chapter we need to go back to the beginning—to the title in fact. Marketing science, without a shadow of a doubt, has brought clarity to how Bert and Ernie work as a team. How the message and its delivery best maximise the opportunity for brand growth. However, following science we must also acknowledge the opportunity for conditions to change and for new findings to emerge. Which is why the chapter is called ‘How Advertising Works (so far)’. For the now, the materials of marketing architecture haven’t changed enough to cause colossal change in buyer

behaviour patterns, so all of our work is underpinned by these patterns. But the next 10 years is gearing up to be the most disruptive in history. Again, just ask our futurists in Chapter 9. All researchers of marketing should keep an open mind, even if that makes them twitch.

> **MEANWHILE IN THE REAL WORLD**
> **Colonel Sanders is bringing sexy back**

KFC and their agency Wieden + Kennedy Portland have brought sexy to the brand. They have reinvented the image of the once wholesome and rather portly Colonel as a Chickendale (think of The Chippendales), a main character for a romance novel (Tender Wings of Desire), a buffed, tattooed and scantily clad virtual influencer and a dating game paramour. They have been experimenting with the Colonel asset for a while. In 2017, they released for sale in time for Cyber Monday the KFC’s igloo Faraday cage complete with the Colonel on top. That year also saw Billy Zane played a fully metallic Golden Colonel promoting the honey mustard BBQ flavour. In 2018, KFC livestreamed four hours of cats climbing on a Colonel Sanders cat scratcher (with 700,000 people tuned in), he also appeared as a limited edition large inflatable pool float, and we saw the first female Colonel played by country music star Reba McEntire. KFC as an overall brand have never shied away from bold PR stunts. In 2016, KFC customers in Hong Kong were introduced to edible, chicken-flavoured nail polish. In 2017, KFC New Zealand offered chocolate truffles made to taste like spicy chicken marinade and the Colonel’s secret spices. And, of course, during the famous UK chicken crisis in 2018, KFC took out full page ads to apologise for running out of chicken, using a simple but clever re-shuffle of their branding. They sent the internet spinning with—FCK. But is making the once traditionally wholesome mascot into a sex symbol going too far? Or is it a clever way to extend an ageing Distinctive Asset to appeal to a younger audience? It’s no different to other popular assets that have changed drastically over time like Louie the Fly, The Michelin Man, Ronald McDonald and Australia’s own Bundy Bear. The editor of AdWeek interviewed Andrea Zahumensky, CMO of KFC US where she argued that, ‘Colonel Sanders has always been sexy, but our strategy is to find new, interesting and provocative ways to make Colonel Sanders a part of culture’. Seeing Colonel Sanders dance around half naked in a video was certainly provocative. And it ticks the _unexpectedness_ box, and the _unwavering commitment_ box, so perhaps they are onto something.

**Bibliography** Ambler, T. (2000). Persuasion, Pride and Prejudice: How Ads Work. _International Journal of Advertising, 19_(3), 219–315. Bartiromo, M. (2017, November 24). KFC Offering 10k ‘Internet Escape Pod’ Ahead of Cyber Monday. _Fox News._ Retrieved from https://www.foxnews.com/ food-drink/kfcs-most-outrageous-marketing-stunts. BBDO New York. (2018). FedEx: What We Deliver by Delivering. _The Drum_. Retrieved from https://www.thedrum.com/creative-works/project/bbdo-new-yorkfedex-what-we-deliver-delivering. Culp, L. (2018, April 4). KFC’s Most Outrageous Marketing Stunts. _Fox News_. Retrieved from https://www.foxnews.com/food-drink/kfc-offering-10k-internetescape-pod-ahead-of-cyber-Monday. Deabler, A. (2018, May 24). KFC Debuts Colonel Sanders Pool Float. _Fox News._ Retrieved from https://www.foxnews.com/food-drink/kfc-debuts-colonel-sanderspool-float. Ehrenberg, A., Barnard, N., Kennedy, R., & Bloom, H. (2002). Brand Advertising as Creative Publicity. _Journal of Advertising Research, 42_(4), 7–18. Ehrenberg, A. S. C. (1988). _Repeat-Buying: Facts, Theory and Applications_ (2nd ed.). Edward Arnold, UK: Oxford University Press. Griner, D. (2019, September 12). A Brief History of Sexy Colonel Sanders. _AdWeek_. Retrieved from https://www.adweek.com/creativity/a-brief-history-ofsexy-colonel-sanders/. Romaniuk, J. (2018). _Building Distinctive Brand Assets_. New York: Oxford University Press. Strong, E. K. (1925). _The Psychology of Selling and Advertising_. New York: McGraw- Hill Book. Wijaya, B. S. (2012). The Development of Hierarchy of Effects Model in Advertising. _International Research Journal of Business Studies, 5_(1), 73–85. Wohl, J. (2017, January 30). Billy Zane is KFC’s New ‘Gold’ Colonel. _AdAge._ Retrieved from https://adage.com/creativity/work/georgia-gold/50719?. Wright, M. (2009). A New Theorem for Optimizing the Advertising Budget. _Journal of Advertising Research, 49_(2), 164–169. Zanger, D. (2018, July 18). KFC Livestreamed 4 Hours of Cats Climbing on Colonel Sanders, and 700,000 People Tuned In. _AdWeek._ Retrieved from https:// www.adweek.com/creativity/kfc-livestreamed-4-hours-of-cats-climbing-on-colonel-sanders-and-70000-people-tuned-in/.

