## Chapter 6: Buying the Best Impression

> _Sometimes the questions are complicated and the answers are simple._
>
> — Dr. Seuss

If someone says you ‘Should’ve gone to Specsavers’, you pretty much know that you’ve missed seeing something obvious. Made famous by the British Optical Retail Chain Specsavers, the advertising tagline reminds people of the potential pitfalls of bad eyesight, with one ad featuring a vet trying to resuscitate his colleague’s fluffy hat after mistaking it for a cat. Not being able to see the signs, makes it hard to realise your end goal. In the age of the ‘new impression’, where the new normal means paying for an ad that is not 100% in view (or even by a human), advertisers find themselves facing similar pitfalls. The advertising impression at its best is a blend of creativity and technical configuration. In this chapter, I talk about the elements that drive the effectiveness of an advertising impression and impact the end goal—sales.

### The Relationship Between Being Seen and Ad Impact

#### The (Long) Path to an Online Viewability Standard

Understanding the relationship between viewability and ad impact is an important part of understanding overall advertising effectiveness. However, in understanding this relationship we first must consider the (long) path to the current online standard. It might feel like a journey to Middle Earth, but stick with me. Way back in what seems the olden days of media (barely ten years ago), measurement error, non-human traffic, below-the-fold delivery and slow loading were rife. They were modestly reported as impacting up to 50% of served online impressions. This meant that around 50% of online impressions an advertiser paid for were not exposed to a real-life potential customer. And that was effectively money down the drain. In 2011, a concerned US advertising industry came together to discuss a pathway towards greater accountability and to establish a currency standard for online impression counting for advertisers. The bodies involved were the IAB, National Association of Advertisers and 4As, together forming Making Measurement Make Sense (3Ms). There was general agreement that viewability must be at the heart of the metric, based on the sensible premise that if an audience can’t see the ad then it couldn’t possibly make a difference.

#### Viewability is a Two-Part Metric

By 2014, online ad viewability standards were set and the US Media Rating Council (MRC) published Version 1.0 (Final) of its Viewable Ad Impression Measurement Guidelines, stating that all MRC-accredited researchers and analytics vendors were to begin counting only viewable ad impressions. For online video, it was determined that at least 50% of the video must be visible for at least 2 seconds to be counted as a chargeable view. While these standards are minimalist by design, they are meant to measure an opportunity to see (OTS) that is comparable to more traditional media impressions like TV. That is, not whether a user, reader or viewer did see the ad in any given environment, but whether they _could_ see the ad. And while most operators have accepted that a standard is appropriate for industry transparency, the push was resisted by online media platforms.

These platforms were counting ads as viewed when they did not appear on the screen and were not actually seen, leaving brand owners less than satisfied. To this day there is considerable debate over both the simplicity of the metric and the standard being set as a minimum threshold. The fact that only a few years after it was set, many platforms are still trading on variations of the standard is testament to stakeholders’ concerns.

QUICK EXPLAINER

**The most powerful player**

Noted by the _Wall Street Journal_ as ‘The Most Powerful Player in Media You’ve Never Heard Of’, the MRC is a not-for-profit organisation, mandated by the US senate to perform accreditation for rating and research companies like Nielsen, comScore and Arbitron. Media companies paying to be accredited by the MRC, align themselves to the MRC Minimum Standards and open themselves up for auditing (undertaken by Ernst and Young). Each time a measurement firm changes its methodology or releases a new product it requires an audit. The first of the standards were released in 1964 relating to: (a) ethics and operations, (b) disclosures, and (c) electronic delivery of advertising. Fast forward to 2014 and the MRC released a standard for counting ad impressions whereby a reasonable fraction of the ad content should appear on the user’s screen for a sufficiently long period of time. We call it viewability.

Bringing national bodies together to agree on a global standard is like herding cats. I applaud the MRC for recognising the need for a standard and reaching agreement on 50% pixels and 2 seconds. But is it enough? Probably not, given the MRC commenced a review of the standard in 2019. Rather than just look at the efficacy of the current standard, I thought it more useful to answer this: what is enough viewability for an advertisement to produce an impact? So, we went on a journey to find out. We gathered data from natural viewing of online video ads on three major video-supported online social platforms on mobile, in three countries, and across two different years of collection (2017 and 2019). This gave us close to 15,000 ad views. We also had TV data from three countries which we include in the discussion on ad length later. This TV data was not used in all analysis here as there is no variation in pixels on TV—it is always 100%. Pixels being the tiny dots of illumination that make up an on-screen image. If you have 100% pixels, it means that your entire picture is showing on the screen.

For this part of our research, we looked at the sales impacts using Short Term Advertising Strength (STAS) of ads that met the MRC standard of 50% pixels and 2 seconds. From this we could see how variations on that standard might affect the impact returns for advertisers. We wanted to know whether a higher (or lower) pixel count and time threshold returns a similar level of sales as the current standard. Remember, factors such as creative, ad frequency and targeting were controlled for through experimental design (see Chapter 2).

The viewability tug of war between advertisers and platform owners comes as no surprise. Advertisers want their advertising to be seen, just like in the ‘old’ days. However, many online platforms have a hard enough time meeting the 50% pixels and 2 second standard, let alone if the standard increased. This would have an obvious impact on their ability to commercialise advertising. You could argue that it isn’t a problem if advertisers aren’t being charged for these below standard placements, but there are wider implications. Big media platforms promote themselves for delivering advertising impact quickly through vast, fast reach. From a theoretical perspective, this offers the best opportunity to gain many buyers across the entire customer base quickly (e.g. brands that need large patronage weekly). But if nearly half the impressions don’t even make the screen, there is a theoretical mismatch between promise and delivery. The result of this mismatch is that the time to achieve vast reach is not very fast at all. Table 6.1 represents the reality of the proportion of views that would meet the MRC standard, as well as views that would meet a modified standard. Our data represents two snapshots (2017 and 2019) across multiple countries, offering a fair representation of online viewing and demonstrating why platform owners might resist more stringent standards. The reality is, if the standards were to be increased (which is a possibility given the 2019 MRC review), the advertising model of many online platforms would be affected. If we focus on the pixel part of the viewability standard in Fig. 6.1, we can see what happens to chargeable inventory if the MRC standard was made more stringent based on pixels alone. Two things are evident here. Firstly, you can see from the 2019 data that there has been an improvement in higher pixel delivery on all counts. A likely result of pressure from advertisers seeking validation of reported

**Table 6.1** Proportion of views reaching standard on mobile (varying pixels)

| Threshold                                         | In-feed social (2017) | In-feed social (2019) | Pre-roll (2017) | Pre-roll (2019) |
| ------------------------------------------------- | --------------------: | --------------------: | --------------: | --------------: |
| 10% pixels for 2 seconds                          |                    89 |                    84 |              87 |              95 |
| 20% pixels for 2 seconds                          |                    83 |                    83 |              85 |              95 |
| 30% pixels for 2 seconds                          |                    70 |                    80 |              84 |              95 |
| 40% pixels for 2 seconds                          |                    63 |                    75 |              81 |              95 |
| **50% pixels for 2 seconds** _(current standard)_ |                **56** |                **69** |          **78** |          **95** |
| 60% pixels for 2 seconds                          |                    50 |                    61 |              76 |              94 |
| 70% pixels for 2 seconds                          |                    44 |                    51 |              73 |              94 |
| 80% pixels for 2 seconds                          |                    37 |                    41 |              68 |              92 |
| 90% pixels for 2 seconds                          |                    28 |                    30 |              66 |              90 |
| 100% pixels for 2 seconds                         |                    21 |                    19 |              48 |              88 |

**Fig. 6.1** Relationship between STAS and pixels, 2017 and 2019

viewability metrics resulting in both Facebook and YouTube applying for MRC accreditation in 2017. Secondly, it shows that platforms offering in-feed advertising still struggle with attaining higher levels of pixels for their advertisers compared with those offering pre-roll advertising. This is a function of the differences in user experience between the platform types (i.e. ability to scroll, ability to skip and the position of the ad on screen). In March 2019 the MRC released a call for research in an effort to review the current viewability standards including, but not limited to,

consideration of increasing to 100% pixels. Cast your eyes back to the bottom row of Table 6.1 for a moment. In their current structure, in-feed social platforms would be in a world of pain if 100% pixels became the standard. In the MRC call for research document, they discuss the implications to certain media types if the pixel standard were to be increased. It says that mobile newsfeed type platforms with vertical scroll would be hit the hardest as a change to 100% pixel requirement would represent a material reduction in reported viewable impressions. Our data show the same. Table 6.2 focuses on the time element of the viewability standard. It shows what happens to chargeable inventory if the MRC standard was made more stringent based only on seconds in view. These tables show that increasing the required seconds in view would be even more detrimental to the platform owners than an increase in pixels. For example, if the standard was increased to 100% pixels from 50% pixels holding the 2-second timeframe constant, the in-feed platforms would lose around 72% of chargeable inventory (pre-roll 7%). However, if the standard for time in view was increased to 10 seconds from 2 seconds, the loss would be significantly greater for both platform types. This data show that viewers are not viewing for very long on these platforms. While this is probably no surprise, you should be aware that this is why online platform owners continue to tout that (very) short form ads can still deliver advertising impact. Problem is, there is little or no evidence of this from rigorous origins. Let’s be clear, if the online viewability standard was increased to 5 seconds (let alone anything longer), many platforms (including pre-roll platforms) would suffer.

**Table 6.2** Proportion of views reaching standard on mobile (varying seconds)

| Threshold                                         | In-feed social (2017) | In-feed social (2019) | Pre-roll (2017) | Pre-roll (2019) |
| ------------------------------------------------- | --------------------: | --------------------: | --------------: | --------------: |
| 50% pixels for 1 second                           |                    66 |                    89 |              78 |              97 |
| **50% pixels for 2 seconds** _(current standard)_ |                **56** |                **69** |          **78** |          **95** |
| 50% pixels for 5 seconds                          |                    30 |                    28 |              76 |              79 |
| 50% pixels for 10 seconds                         |                    16 |                    11 |              59 |              43 |
| 50% pixels for 15 seconds                         |                     8 |                     6 |              46 |              37 |
| 50% pixels for 20 seconds                         |                     3 |                     4 |              27 |              23 |
| 50% pixels for 25 seconds                         |                     2 |                     3 |              23 |              16 |
| 50% pixels for 30 seconds                         |                     1 |                     2 |              10 |              15 |

> **REMEMBER THIS SIMPLE TRUTH**
> A move to make the pixel standard higher (than 50%) would be far less damaging for online platform advertising revenue than an increase in view length. This explains why many online platforms are much louder with their arguments to keep the time in view standard low.

> **QUICK EXPLAINER**
> **Attention and viewability are not the same**

What is the difference between viewability and attention? The terms viewability and attention are often used interchangeably (particularly when comparing TV and digital media) and it’s just not right. We really do need a clearer distinction between the two. Viewability is the responsibility of the media owner. It means giving a consumer the opportunity to see an ad on their platform within the standards set by the MRC. Digital ads might load (and be charged for) at 50% pixels while TV ads air at 100% pixels. The amount of attention paid to any level of served viewability is a completely different construct. The level of attention paid is affected by many factors, of which viewability is just one. Attention is a consumer output, viewability is a media owner output.

With all the hurrah around making the viewability standard more stringent we became interested in whether it even matters. Does increasing or decreasing either of these variables make a difference to advertising impact? To consider advertising impact at different levels of viewability, we calculated a STAS score for respondents who were exposed to advertising at each different level of the two components of viewability: pixels and time spent viewing. For example, we calculated a STAS score for 1 second and 10% pixels, 2 seconds and 10% pixels, and then 1 second and 20% pixels, 2 seconds and 20% pixels etc., until we had a STAS score for every decile of pixels and every unit of time for the length of the advertisements. We then plotted these scores for views on each online platform. It should be noted that Figs. 6.1 and 6.2 demonstrate the relationships between STAS and pixels for in-feed social platforms only, given the lack of variation in pixels on platforms showing pre-roll advertising.

**Fig. 6.2** Relationship between attention and pixels, 2017 and 2019

Figure 6.1 shows the relationship between the number of pixels in view and STAS. Our data consistently show the higher the proportion of pixels on screen (any screen), the higher the likelihood it will have a sales impact. This also shows a clear improvement on ROI above the current 50% pixel standard. With all that said, you might not sell out your entire inventory of widgets simply because one ad is placed on a platform that supports higher pixels. Remember, advertising doesn’t move mountains, its impact is small but positive and our STAS data reflect that. While STAS does increase at each pixel decile, the degree of extra sales at each point is typically moderate. STAS is a measure that accounts for market share as a baseline (as discussed in Chapter 2). This means that any increases represent real incremental impact over what would have been achieved ordinarily in market without any impression. That the uplift is small demonstrates the appropriateness of STAS as a proxy to in-market sales. The point here is not about _how many_ extra sales you get for demanding higher pixels, it’s that higher pixels does drive extra sales—period.

> **REMEMBER THIS SIMPLE TRUTH**
> More pixels on screen typically means more sales. If an ad is not seen, how can it possibly cut through (and be effective)?

When looking at attention and pixels the pattern is similar. More pixels on screen means the ad will likely attract higher levels of attention. Figure 6.2 shows that this relationship was seen consistently across 2017 and 2019 (keeping the groups constant with Fig. 6.1). None of this is hard to believe, if an ad is not seen it can’t cut through and be effective. So when it comes to pixels, it turns out that bigger is better. The greater the pixels on screen the more likely attention is paid, the more likely a sale will result; with 100% pixels being optimal. This might seem intuitive but you’d be surprised how many people have drunk the Kool-Aid and forgotten what matters most. What matters most is being seen!

The second part of the viewability metric relates to seconds in view. Does the length of time an ad is in view, make a difference to attention and STAS? Well, yes it does, thanks for asking. But STAS and attention are two different variables measured on vastly different scales which complicates their relationship. Attention is measured on a smaller scale, which means that variations will be smaller. STAS is measured on a far greater scale (uncapped) making room for far greater variation. Nevertheless, we determined that the number of seconds in view reaches a point of diminishing returns for both STAS and attention. A point we call the sweet spot. From averaged data, this sweet spot sits at around the 10-second mark, where attention begins to wane and STAS starts to decline. We were able to test this for attention across different boundary conditions with another data set not previously used in the main viewability analysis (because it doesn’t include STAS). The additional data represented the same platforms and same countries but was collected with no creative controls. This means that viewers saw ads the platform naturally served them in their feed; we did not intercept and replace with our test ads. The most interesting point about using the additional data is that while the average attention differed slightly (albeit not by much), the pattern showed a similar drop-off in attention at the 10-second mark.

> **REMEMBER THIS SIMPLE TRUTH**
> Where pixels go up, attention (typically) goes up. But after the first 5–10 seconds, as time goes up, attention goes down (and sales follow suit).

You might be thinking that of course the data dips at around 10 seconds because no-one watches old fashioned long-form ads anymore. There may be some truth to this, seconds in view on all media is slowly getting lower each year. In our data, we did see attention to advertising dip at an earlier point for in-feed social than it does for pre-roll; while attention for both dipped earlier than it does for TV. Interestingly, even though time spent viewing might change year on year (i.e. it _is_ going down), the relativity between the platforms seems to remain constant. For example, we see that TV delivers the highest seconds on screen, and in-feed social delivers the lowest regardless of collection year, and regardless of country. Also, there is evidence in the literature that seconds on screen (or time spent viewing in more traditional platforms) is directly related to the environment in which the ad is placed. Therefore, contextual factors will affect the time course of attention. All of this suggests that ‘average time viewing’ or ‘average seconds in view’ is the natural point at which viewer attention diminishes on that specific platform and is a true reflection of the platform experience (such as, content/programming served) and/or modal differences (such as, viewability and usability), rather than any reflection of ad length.

> **REMEMBER THIS SIMPLE TRUTH**
> While it would seem that more time on screen is better, optimal time varies depending on the platform. The inherent nature of modal differences means that some platforms support extended attention, some don’t. One size does not fit all.

I have one final myth to bust here. We find no evidence that getting attention early results in a longer view. For example, we cannot see that gaining high average attention in the first couple of seconds, will result in the viewer watching for longer. We can see that average seconds viewed is average seconds viewed regardless of how high or low the initial attention is. Marketers (wrongly) hold on to the notion that early attention must mean sustained ad engagement. It doesn’t. What this also says is that vital information (such as the brand!) should be loud and proud upfront. Every fleeting attention point is precious, without brand presence the opportunity can be wasted (more on this in Chapter 7). Our verdict on seconds in view: as long as practically possible. Trying to place a longer ad on a platform that naturally delivers shorter time spent viewing is a waste of time. Sounds obvious when you read it out

loud, but most think that their campaigns are different (a bit like most think their ads will go viral, but they don’t). No matter how good your creative is, the attention span on that media is the attention span on that media. So being able to achieve high rates of pixels on screen in the first few seconds of an exposure is even more important on platforms where audiences naturally view for less time. The question should be then, which platform will deliver the average viewing time needed for the campaign/creative objectives at hand?

> **REMEMBER THIS SIMPLE TRUTH**
> Being able to achieve high proportion of pixels in the first few seconds of the impression is even more important on platforms where time spent viewing advertising is naturally lower.

If coverage and pixels had a fight, who would win? And would clutter be the referee? As if failed pixel delivery isn’t enough, the other enemy lurking on the screen is visual crowding, which is marketing speak for spatial clutter. It can be advertising, editorial, friend posts, comments, other video recommendations, stories, the list goes on and on and on. It is pervasive and distracting and has long been noted as having a negative impact on advertising effectiveness, no matter how effectiveness is measured. Screen coverage is one way to measure the degree of visual crowding, where screen coverage is the proportion of the screen that the ad covers. It is a proportionate measure and doesn’t consider the type of clutter or its specific visual properties (i.e. colour, shape, motion etc.). There _is_ evidence that the type of clutter affects the level of distraction, so we plan to incorporate this into our future measure. For now though, we consider the overall scale of clutter. Before your brain overheats from shifting between pixels and screen coverage, Fig. 6.3 shows the difference between the two. Pixels is the proportion of the _ad_ that is on screen, while screen coverage is the proportion of the _screen_ that the ad covers. Pixels can be 100%, and screen coverage be less than 100%. But if you have 100% screen coverage then you will always have 100% pixels.

**Fig. 6.3** Coverage versus pixels

To be clear, pixels not screen coverage, is currently included in the MRC viewability standard. Think about it. When you use different platforms the advertising real estate varies considerably. We see this in our own data. When an ad renders 100% pixels on Facebook on a _PC_ it only fills 10% of the screen. While for YouTube this number jumps to 30% (from our 2017 data) and around 20% for Twitter. On a _mobile_ the real estate is improved in terms of reduced spatial clutter. When an ad hits 100% pixels on Facebook (viewed in vertical) around 30% of the screen is covered, for Twitter around 35% and for YouTube at just under 40%. For comparison, TV on a TV screen is typically 100% screen coverage and 100% pixels. The take home message is that when screen coverage is higher there will be naturally less clutter around the ad and on the screen. But we were curious. Given that clutter is noted to have a negative impact on ad effectiveness, and our findings consistently show that ad pixels have an impact on sales and attention, could screen coverage impact effectiveness too? It is, after all, an element of visibility. \=

clutter. Whereas in most cases on mobile, when an ad reaches 100% pixels by default it takes up a greater amount of the screen, limiting the amount of remaining space and reducing the levels of spatial clutter. In short, we still see a relationship between coverage and attention (and sales) but device is a mediating factor. For example, 30% coverage on a small screen represents less relative spatial crowding than 30% coverage on a larger screen.

> **REMEMBER THIS SIMPLE TRUTH**
> We can see a third possible player in the visibility game. As pixels approach their limit of possibility, screen coverage (% of the screen the ad occupies) becomes more important.

This suggests that screen coverage compounds impact beyond pixels alone. Meaning as pixels approach their limit of possibility (i.e. 100% pixels on a screen which can’t physically get any bigger) the importance of coverage comes into play, and this importance is greater on larger screens. In Fig. 6.4 we see that on a large screen an ad may offer greater coverage than a smaller screen, but if it renders at 50% pixels it runs the risk of the brand never appearing. In terms of which is better, pixels or coverage, the answer is pixels. More ad pixels covering less of the screen is better than fewer ad pixels covering a larger proportion of the screen. More ad pixels literally means a greater opportunity to recognise the brand that is advertising. Whereas more screen coverage (with lower pixels) might still mean the brand is out of sight.

**Fig. 6.4** Coverage and pixels relative to spatial clutter

Of course, nirvana is reached when you maximise both, where the optimal placement would be 100% pixels and 100% coverage. How’s your brain going? Overheating yet?

> **REMEMBER THIS SIMPLE TRUTH**
> First achieve 100% pixels in view, then maximise coverage.

### Media Context

#### Is Editorial Context a Magical Missing Piece?

Over the past few chapters we’ve taken you on a journey to understand the media attributes that contribute to greater levels of attention, as well as what advertisers can expect from the limited processing capacity of consumers. This knowledge goes some way to inform buying and creating the best impression. You will have also learned that for most of our research we have applied strict experimental controls, holding the creative constant across platforms. This makes the results robust, ensuring they can be truly attributed to the media factor we are testing at the time. But it has also meant that we’ve never had the opportunity to consider an exhaustive list of media context in our research. And while we can account for a good amount of variation in attention and STAS considering the variables we have, there is still some magic we can’t account for. In the literature, media context is typically split into two categories: editorial context and commercial context. Commercial context includes factors we have covered, such as clutter, ad viewability and placement. Editorial context relates specifically to the environment in which the ad is placed. This could be program/editorial quality (often categorised as expert and non-expert), program induced intensity (high/low emotions), or thematic congruency (where the advertised brand is directly related to the theme). I referred earlier to _a_ magical missing piece, not _the_ magical missing piece because no research will ever be able to completely account for human behaviour. With that said, there is merit in the hypothesis that editorial context could play a significant role in driving attention. We see this briefly in our own (albeit limited) data. We can see that ads placed within quality

programming generate a 6 percentage point uplift in sales over standard advertising in an ad pod (on the same platform), and up to a 10 percentage point improvement in average attention. This is encouraging, but one set of data with a positive result is not enough for a sweeping generalisation. You would think determining whether editorial context matters is easy, given researchers (both industry and scholar) have looked at its impact on advertising for decades. But the results are mixed. Literature is filled with contrary conclusions and methodological bias, and is based on testing using recall and purchase intent measures. Some more recent work using remote eye-tracking gives us hope that our hypothesis is correct. In 2019, IAB UK partnered with Lumen and IPSOS MORI to explore how editorial context, and greater contextual factors, impact attention. They considered premium content sites versus task sites on PC. Where premium content is editorially curated by publishers, such as The Guardian and Good Housekeeping, and task sites are practical and task oriented, such as National Rail and Rightmove. They found that advertising on premium content sites resulted in three times the attention of task sites. The IAB did not describe the experimental framework that sits below this study, so we find the results promising but not definitive. While we cannot conclusively confirm that editorial context makes a difference, the early signs are good. More work needs to be done, but I’ll put my money on _yes_ for now. I do expect that editorial context plays a role in buying the best impression.

It remains a mystery to me how marketers can understand the relationship between being seen and ad impact when it comes to ad fraud, but are then happy to accept (and pay for) an ad where most of the ad pixels could sit below the fold. How are these two different? In the first one, the ad is not seen by a human. In the second, the ad is not seen by a human. As much as these types of findings don’t help us make friends, especially those who stand to lose the most commercially, the fact remains that there is a relationship between being seen and impact—both attention and sales. The overloaded world we live in makes this even more pertinent, suffice to say I wouldn’t be putting my media dollars on a platform where less than 100% in view is considered good enough. And Dr. Seuss is right, the answers are pretty simple.

> **MEANWHILE IN THE REAL WORLD**
> **Specsavers take their own advice on unobstructed vision**

‘Media In Focus’ (2017) is another instalment in Binet and Field’s _Marketing In the Era of Accountability_ series. Sometimes referred to as ‘the fathers of effectiveness’, the duo place great emphasis on maintaining a healthy balance between long-term brand building and short-term sales activations. In this edition, they profile one company that has ticked all the brand growth boxes—Specsavers. They say that very few case studies can illustrate the value of a long-term focus quite like this one. Specsavers’ commitment to the campaign creative for ‘Should’ve gone to Specsavers’, as well as their commitment to a focus on high visibility media including TV (and others such as out-of-home and print) has led to net profit of 129% over the 20 year life of the campaign. Binet and Field say that they doubt 20 years of short-term activation-based advertising would achieve success of this scale. Perhaps Specsavers really do value the ability to SEE across all aspects of their business. Bibliography Elkington, T. (2019). _Why It Pays to Play by the Rules of Attention_. WARC Exclusive. Furnham, A., Gunter, B., & Richardson, F. (2002). Effects of Product-Program Congruity and Viewer Involvement on Memory for Televised Advertisements 1. _Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 32_(1), 124–141. Greenberg, A. S. (2012). The Role of Visual Attention in Internet Advertising: Eleven Questions and a Score of Answers. _Journal of Advertising Research, 52_(4), 400–404. GroupM. (2017). Gr*oupM Rolls Out Unexpected Viewability Standards*. Retrieved from https://www.groupm.com/news/groupm-rolls-out-expanded-viewabilitystandards. Ha, L., & McCann, K. (2008). An Integrated Model of Advertising Clutter in Offline and Online Media. _International Journal of Advertising, 27_(4), 569–592. Kwon, E. S., King, K. W., Nyilasy, G., & Reid, L. N. (2019). Impact of Media Context on Advertising Memory: A Meta-Analysis of Advertising Effectiveness. _Journal of Advertising Research, 59_(1), 99–128. Media Rating Council. (2019a)_. Media Rating Council_. Retrieved from http://mediaratingcouncil.org/.

Media Rating Council. (2019b). _MRC Issues Draft Version of Cross-Media Audience Measurement Standards for Video_; _Opens 60-Day Public Comment Period_. Retrieved from http://mediaratingcouncil.org/MRC%20Issues%20Draft%20Version%20of% 20Cross-Media%20Audience%20Measurement%20%20Standards%20For%20 Video.pdf. Moorman, M. (2003). _Context Considered: The Relationship Between Media Environments and Advertising Effects_. Amsterdam: Universiteit van Amsterdam \[Host\]. Pinto, Y., van der Leij, A. R., Sligte, I. G., Lamme, V. A., & Scholte, H. S. (2013). Bottom-Up and Top-Down Attention Are Independent. _Journal of Vision, 13_(3), 16. Shields, M. (2015, March 5). The Most Power Player in Media You’ve Never Heard Of. _The Wall Street Journal_. Retrieved from https://blogs.wsj.com/ cmo/2015/03/05/the-most-powerful-player-in-media-youve-never-heard-of/.

